Science Communication in the Social Media Era

Kirk Englehardt @kirkenglehardt
	- Georgia Institute of Techonolog
	- he grew up in south florida

He helps communicate the scientific message out of georgia tech

Paper publishing:
	- 1.8 million papers published every year
	- nobody will read or site your paper, this can help
	- junior and recent grads have grown up communicating this way and use this to excel

Carl Sagan popularizing science
	- he wasn't taken seriously at first because he was out in the media so much

If you can't be found online, you are at a disadvantage.  You need to be a better communicator, not just a better researcher

Blogging and the tweeting are the two he will cover

ResearchGate is a place to publish papers and have discussions

LinkedIn:
	- Great picture
	- fill in all blanks
	- connect with as many groups as possible
	- Make sure to show examples

Targeting for expanding linkedIn 
	http://socilab.com/#home
	scilogs? - this is a closed blog platform

This is like growing a garden, you get what you put in... a while later.

Kirk is a really large fan of blogs
	- Blogs 
		Pros:
		- Searchable
		- reputation building
		- post longform status updates on linked in
			- started linked in with clickbate and it worked.
		Cons:
		- Time investment
		- Promotion elsewhere
		If you blog, you have to lead people to it

He posts lots of stuff on twitter
	- he believes it grows organically
	- people will share what they find interesting
	- A benefit of twitter is that people create better connections based on what is shared
	- You can do analysis on data that is shared and tweet them the results
	- The top influencer is not usually the person with the most followers
	- It comes down to providing value to others
	-smrfoundation.com will help you analyze twitter


Dr. Judith Curry
	- Screw pay walls.  She publishes online 
	- She gets lots of comments on the blog and reads all of them to get more information on the 


Kirkeng@gatech.com

	Hi Kirk,

	Thanks for your presentation today in EMSL.  I really appreciated your viewpoint on social media and am excited to develop a stronger presence for both myself and the operations research team at PNNL.  Are there any actionable first steps that we should take?  Based on your presentation I believe we should be focusing on creating blog posts and promoting them through linkedIn groups and twitter.  Are there other things we should be focusing on?

	Thanks,
	-Dan Skorski

Create an engagement plan

Call Mike Wasem about PNNL stuff
	


